---
date: 2025-09-30T14:45:02.633Z
layout: post
title: "Can quantum entanglement help you sync your database replicas?"

subtitle: "Replicating data across multiple locations (nodes/datacenters
etc.) is a common practice in modern applications that operate at scale.
However, with data replication, keeping multiple replicas in sync
becomes a challenge. In this post, lets look at a unique approach
originating in quantum mechanics that might help tackle this issue."

description: "Replicating data across multiple nodes/clusters/data
centres is a common approach among applications that need to support
scalability/fault tolerance/disaster managemenet. However, this approach
also introduces the problem of keeping the replicas in sync. Existing
methods use distributed consensus mechanisms to keep replicas in sync,
with the latest write. In this approach, we explore an approach based on
quantum mechanics that has the potential to revolutnize the field."

category: ["system design"]
tags: ["software engineering", "design"]
author: abdulrahim
---

## Introduction

To ensure scalability, reliability and fault tolerance, web applications
replicate data across multiple database nodes/clusters/availability
zones/regions and cloud providers. However, replicating data introduces
the challenge of keeping the copies in sync. In this article, we
contemplate weather quantum entanglement can enable database replicas to
sync instantinously. The ideas behind entanglement stem from quantum
mechanics, a subfield of physics which describes the behaviour of sub
atomic particles.

In this post, we first describe the basics of database replication, then
we move on the show the theoritical application of quantum entanglement
in database replication.

## Basics of data replication

The figure below shows a simplified setup of client-server web
applications. The user would send requests to the backend. Then this
request goes through several components like load balancers, app
servers, caching servers etc. These components perform several functions
like request validation, communicating with database server to
manipulate data, responding back the the user etc. In the diagram below,
we've abstracted away all these details for simplification.  The app
servers and other components need to communicate with a database system
to manipulate user data and return appropriate response.

![](https://i.ibb.co/WN8CjXFt/Screenshot-from-2025-09-30-21-37-32.png)

However, there are few problems with this design. Consider what happens,
if the machine running the database system collapses. The user's data
will be lost and there's no way we can recover it back. Also, consider
what would happen when there are much more users than the capacity of
the database server. In this case, the queries will become slow and
user's will experience higher latency.

To solve these problems, we can replicate the data across multiple
nodes. Each such node (or database server) is called a replica. In a
simple scheme, we have a single master replica and multiple slave
replicas.  The write requests are handled by master replicate, while
read requests are handled by slave replicas.

This architecture introduces the following features into our system:

1. scalability: read requests can be distributed among read replicas
   allowing the system to handle more number of read requests compared
   to previous approach
2. availability: if one of the replica goes down, the system will remain
   functional since others can handle the request
3. redundancy: since we are storing the same data at multiple places,
   we no longer keep a single copy of user's data i.e. we store the data
   redundantly
4. fault tolerance: the system is more tolerant to node failures

A simple implementation of the above scheme would look like:

![](https://i.ibb.co/tpqDCPpy/Screenshot-from-2025-09-30-22-17-35.png)

Suppose, we need to update a piece of data. Now we would route the write
request to the master replica. The master replica will update it's own
database. However, the master replica is no longer in sync with read
replicas (in that the read replicas still show an outdated version of
the data). Therefore, we need to communicate the newly  updated data
across read replicas. This can be easily achieved by making an update
request synchronously/asynchronously from master replica to slave
replicas.  The time it takes for data to travel from master replica to
all slave replicas is called replication lag.

![](https://i.ibb.co/8L9LvnV9/Screenshot-from-2025-09-30-22-26-01.png)

However, during this procedure, there is still a short duration in which
read replicas hold inconsistent data. You can either block or allow
incoming read requests on slave replicas depending on weather you are
optimizing for consistency or availability.

If you allow the read requests during updation of slave replicas, then
you allow the user to read stale data, hence your system is not
consisten (in that the read requests is not returning the latest data),
however, your system is available (the user is returned with some
response instead of error).

On the other hand, if you block read requests in this duration, then you
are basically returning the user with an error response. You system is
hence less available, but more consistent (in that if a user reads data,
it is guaranted that it is latest).

The tradeoff's are based on requirements of your system and the nature
of application at hand.

## Quantum entanglement

Quantum physics is the subfield of physics that describes the behaviour
of subatomic particles. This field was introduced, after it was
discovered that classical mechanics cannot be used to describe the
behaviour of subatomic particles.

Subatomic particles like electrons and photons exhibit what is called
wave-particle duality. It means that they act as a wave as well as
particles depending on how it is observed or measured.

Acording to quantum mechanics, the complete state of a subatomic
particle like electron, photon etc. can be described by its wave
function. It encodes information such as its position, momentum, spin,
etc. For a single particle, this wavefunction can be spread out in
space, indicating a superposition of many possible states. This is known
as superposition: the particle doesnâ€™t have a definite state until
measured.

Quantum entanglement is a phenomena in quantum mechanics, where two or
more particles become correlated in such a way that the quantum state of
one particle cannot be described independently of the quantum state of
the other(s), no matter how far apart they are.

This means that if 2 particles are entangled, and we measure the state
of one particle. Then the state of the second particle is guaranteed to
be same, irrespective of the distance between these 2 particles.

This has serious implications in physics, since it appears to violate
the principle of locality which states that information cannot travel
faster than light. However, this is not the case, since there is no
tranfer of information. It is not as if, when the first particle was
measured, it transmitted its state information across to its entangled
counter part instantinously so it can take adjusts its state. Instead,
the 2 particles have corellated wave function. Measurement of one's
state instaniously determines the state of the other.

Quantum entanglement is known to be true and has been proved
experimentally by bell in 1960s. Now if we consider this fact at face
value, we can build some really cool applications out of it.


